---
title: 'Electro  Chemistry'
weight: 9
---

  

33

**Learning Objectives** Aft er learning this unit, the students will be able to  Recognise the conductivity of

electrolylic solution  Defi ne the terms resistivity, conductivity

equivalent and molar conductivity  Explain the variation of conductivity

with concentration  Apply Kohlrausch law to calculate the

conductivity of weak electrolyte at infinite dilution.

 Describe an electrochemical cell  Diff erentiate between an

electrochemical and electolylic cell  Represent a galvanic cell using IUPAC

cell notation  Derive Nernst equation and apply it to

calculate Ecell.  Defi ne Faraday’s Law of electrolysis  Describe the construction of batteries  Explain corrosion as an electrochemical

process.

**ELECTRO CHEMISTRY**

**UNIT**

**9**

**Walther Hermann Nernst**

**Walther Hermann Nernst,** was a German chemist known for his work in thermodynamics, physical chemistry, electrochemistry, and solid state physics. His formulation of the Nernst heat theorem helped to pave the way for the third law of thermodynamics, for which he won the 1920 Nobel Prize in Chemistry. He is also known for developing the Nernst equation in 1887. He also derived the Nernst equation for the electrical potential generated by unequal concentrations of an ion separated by a membrane that is permeable to the ion. His equation is widely used in cell physiology and neurobiology.

XII U9 Electro Chemistry.indd 33 2/19/2020 5:11:40 PM

www.tntextbooks.in




  

34

**INTRODUCTION** We have come across many materials in our life, and they can be broadly classified

into conductors, semiconductors and insulators based on their electrical conductivity. You might have noticed that conducting materials such as copper, aluminium etc., are used to transport electrical energy from one place to another place, and the insulating materials such as PVC, Bakelite etc., in switches, circuit boards etc., Do you know how the electrical energy is generated? We know from first Law of thermodynamics that energy can neither be created nor be destroyed, but one form of energy can be converted into another form. It is not possible to create electrical energy but we can generate electrical energy in many ways i.e., by converting solar energy, wind energy, tidal energy etc.... one such a way is converting chemical energy into electrical energy as in the case of batteries. We cannot imagine a modern technological world without batteries. Hence it is important to know the principles behind this type of energy conversion. The branch of chemistry that deals with the study of electrical energy transport and the inter conversion of electrical and chemical energy is called electrochemistry. Electrochemical reactions are redox reactions and they involve the transfer of electron from one substance to another.

In this unit, we will learn about the electrical conduction, construction of batteries and the thermodynamic principles involved in electro chemical reactions.

## Conductivity of electrolytic solution
 We have already learnt that when an electrolyte such as

sodium chloride, potassium chloride etc... is dissolved in a solvent like water, the electrolyte is completely dissociated to give its constituent ions (namely cations and anions). When an electric field is applied to such an electrolytic solution, the ions present in the solution carry charge from one electrode to another electrode and thereby they conduct electricity. The conductivity of the electrolytic solution is measured using a conductivity cell. (Fig 9.1)

A conductivity cell consists of two electrodes immersed in an electrolytic solution. It obeys Ohm's law like metallic conductor. i.e., at a constant temperature, the current flowing through the cell (I) is directly proportional to the voltage across the cell (V).

i.e., I Vα (or) I = V R

V = IR ⇒ .....(9.1)

Where ‘R’ is the resistance of the solution in ohm (Ω) Here the resistance is the opposition that a cell

offers to the flow of electric current through it.

Platinium electrode (Area-A)

Electrolytic solution

**Figure 9.1 conductivity cell**

XII U9 Electro Chemistry.indd 34 2/19/2020 5:11:41 PM

www.tntextbooks.in




  

35

**Resistivity** ( )ρ

Let us consider a conductivity cell in which the electrolytic solution is confined between the two electrodes having cross sectional area (A) and are separated by a distance ‘_l_ ’ . Like the metallic conductor, the resistance of such an electrolytic solution is also directly proportional to the length (_l_ ) and inversely proportional to the cross sectional area (A).

R A

R = A

α

ρ

_l_

_l_ (9.2)

Where ρ (rho) is called the specific resistance or resistivity, which depends on the nature of the electrolyte.

If _l_ A

1 m-1= , then, ρ = R . Hence the resistivity is defind as the resistance of an electrolyte

confined between two electrodes having unit cross sectional area and are separated by a unit

distance. The ratio l A

 

 

is called the cell constant, Unit of resistivity is ohm metre (Ωm).

**Conductivity** It is more convenient to use conductance rather than resistance. The reciprocal of the

resistance 1 R( ) gives the conductance of an

electrolytic solution. The SI unit of conductance is Siemen (S) .

C = 1 R

..... (9.3)

Substitute (R) from (9.2) in (9.3)

⇒ i.e., C = 1 . A ρ _l_ .....(9.4)

The reciprocal of the specific resistance 1 ρ( ) is called the specific conductance (or)

conductivity. It is represented by the symbol κappa ( )κ .

Substitute 1 in equation (9.4) and rearranging

\= C

ρ κ

κ

\=

⇒ . A

_l_ 

 

.....( . )9 5

If A = 1m and = 1m2 _l_ ; then κ = C. The specific conductance is defined as the conductance of a cube of an electrolytic solution

of unit dimensions(Fig 9.2). The SI unit of specific conductance is Sm-1 .

**Example**

A conductivity cell has two platinum electrodes separated by a distance 1.5 cm and the cross sectional area of each electrode is 4.5 sq cm. Using this cell, the resistance of 0.5 N

Unit of

\= 1 . A

1 ohm

. m m

ohm m = mho m

2

\-1 -1 -

κ

κ R

_l_  

 

\= 1 -1(or) Sm

**Fig 9.2 conductivity of a cube of an electrolytic solution**

1m

1m

1m

Electrolytic Solution

XII U9 Electro Chemistry.indd 35 2/19/2020 5:11:50 PM

www.tntextbooks.in




  

36

electrolytic solution was measured as 15 Ω . Find the specific conductance of the solution.

**Solution**

κ = 1 R A

_l l_ 

 

\= 1 5. cm = 1.5 10 m

\= 1 15

m m

\-2

2

\- -

×

× × ×

κ Ω

1 5 10 4 5 10

2

4 . .

A = 4.5 cm m

\= 2.22 Sm

2 2

\-1

\-= ×4 5 10 4. ( )

R = 15Ω

### Molar conductivity
 ( )mΛ Solutions of different concentrations have different number of electrolytic ions in a given

volume of solution and hence they have different specific conductance. Therefore a new quantity called molar conductance ( )mΛ was introduced.

Let us imagine a conductivity cell in which the electrodes are separated by 1m and having V m3 of electrolytic solution which contains 1 mole of electrolyte. The conductance of such a system is called the molar conductance ( )mΛ

We have just learnt that the conductance of 1 m3 electrolytic solution is called the specific conductance ( )κ . Therefore, the conductance of the above mentioned V m3 solution ( )mΛ is given by the following expression.

( ) = VmΛ κ × .....(9.6)

We know that, molarity (M) = Number of moles of solute (n)

Volume of the solution (V in dm3)

Therefore, Volume of the solution containing one mole of solute = M

mol L-11 ( )

∴ ( )Volume per m (V = 10 M

mol m

Substitute (9.7) in (9.

3 -1 3 -3

)

6)

( . )9 6 (Sm ) 10 M

mol mm

\-3-1 -1 -3⇒ = ×Λ κ

.....(9.8)

The above relation defines the molar conductance in terms of the specific conductance and the concentration of the electrolyte.

**Example**

Calculate the molar conductance of 0.025M aqueous solution of calcium chloride at 25C. The specific conductance of calcium chloride is 12 04. . 10 Sm-2 -1×

Molar conductance = (Sm ) 10 M

mol mm

\-3-1 -1 3Λ = ×κ

\= (12.04 10 Sm 10 mol-2 -1 -3 -1× ×) m

\= 481.6 10 Sm

3

\-5 2

( )

× 0 025. mol-1

XII U9 Electro Chemistry.indd 36 2/19/2020 5:12:04 PM

www.tntextbooks.in




  

37

**Evaluate yourself : 1**

Calculate the molar conductance of 0.01M aqueous KCl solution at 25C . The specific conductance of KC_l_ at 25C is 14 114 10 2. × - - Sm 1 .

### Equivalent conductance
 ( )Λ Equivalent conductance is defined as the conductance of 'V' m3 of electrolytic solution

containing one gram equivalent of electrolyte in a conductivity cell in which the electrodes are one metre apart.

The relation between the equivalent conductance and the specific conductance is given below.

Λ= (Sm ) 10 (gram equivalent) m N

\-1 -3 -1 3κ × .....(9..9)

Where κ the specific conductance and N is the concentration of the electrolytic solution expressed in normality.

**Evaluate yourself : 2**

The resistance of 0.15N solution of an electrolyte is 50 Ω. The specific conductance of the solution is 2 4. . Sm-1 The resistance of 0.5 N solution of the same electrolyte measured using the same conductivity cell is 480 Ω. Find the equivalent conductivity of 0.5 N solution of the electrolyte. Given that

1 2 -1

1 2

1 2

R 50 R 480 = 2.4 Sm = ?

N = 0.15 N N = 0.5 N κ κ

\= Ω = Ω

Λ = (Sm ) 10 (gram equivalent) m

N w2

\-3 -1 3-1κ × e know that

\= 0.25 10 S (gram equivalent) m-3 -1× 2

\-4

\= Cell constant

R

\= 5 10

0 5. κ

Λ × Sm gram equivalent 2 -1 ∴ κ2

1

1

2 =

R R

κ

R R

2 1 1

2 κ κ= ×

\= 2.4 Sm 50 480

\-1 × Ω Ω

\= 0.25 Sm-1

### Factors affecting electrolytic conductance
 If the interionic attraction between the oppositely charged ions of solutes increases, the

conductance will decrease.

XII U9 Electro Chemistry.indd 37 2/19/2020 5:12:10 PM

www.tntextbooks.in




  

38

z Solvent of higher dielectric constant show high conductance in solution. z Conductance is inversely proportional to the Viscosity of the medium. i.e., conductivity

increases with the decrease in viscosity. z If the temperature of the electrolytic solution increases, conductance also increases. Increase

in temperature increases the kinetic energy of the ions and decreases the attractive force between the oppositely charged ions and hence conductivity increases.

z Molar conductance of a solution increases with increase in dilution. This is because, for a strong electrolyte, interionic forces of attraction decrease with dilution. For a weak electrolyte, degree of dissociation increases with dilution.

### Measurement of conductivity of ionic solutions
 We have already learnt to measure the

specific resistance of a metallic wire using a metre bridge in your physics practical experiment. We know that it works on the principle of wheatstone bridge. Similarly, the conductivity of an electrolytic solution is determined by using a wheatstone bridge arrangement in which one resistance is replaced by a conductivity cell filled with the electrolytic solution of unknown conductivity.

In the measurement of specific resistance of a metallic wire, a DC power supply is used. Here, if we apply DC current through the conductivity cell, it will lead to the electrolysis of the solution taken in the cell. So, AC current is used for this measurement to prevent electrolysis.

A wheatstone bridge is constituted using known resistances P, Q, a variable resistance S and conductivity cell (Let the resistance of the electrolytic solution taken in it be R) as shown in the figure 9.3. An AC source (550 Hz to 5 KHz) is connected between the junctions A and C. Connect a suitable detector E (Such as the telephone ear piece detector) between the junctions ‘B’ and ‘D’.

The variable resistance ‘S’ is adjusted until the bridge is balanced and in this conditions there is no current flow through the detector.

Under balanced condition,

P Q = R

S R = P

Q S ∴ × .....(9.10)

Conductivity cell

Water thermostat

E

P Q

S

AC Source

Electrolytic solution

(Resistance = R)

A

B

C

D

**Fig 9.3 Schematic diagram of a conductivity cell in a wheatstone bridge circuit**

XII U9 Electro Chemistry.indd 38 2/19/2020 5:12:12 PM

www.tntextbooks.in




  

39

The resistance of the electrolytic solution (R) is calculated from the known resistance values P, Q and the measured ‘S’ value under balanced condition using the above expression (9.10).

**Conductivity calculation**

Specific conductance (or) conductivity of an electrolyte can be calculated from the resistance value using the following expression.

κ = 1 R

A

_l_ 

 

\[ equat ion 9.5\]

The value of the cell constant l A

is usually provided by the cell manufacturer. Alternatively

the cell constant may be determined using KCl solution whose concentration and specific

conductance are known.

**Example** The resistance of a conductivity cell is measured as 190 Ω using 0.1M KCl solution

(specific conductance of -10.1M KCl is 1.3 Sm ) . When the same cell is filled with 0.003M sodium chloride solution, the measured resistance is 6.3KΩ. Both these measurements are made at a particular temperature. Calculate the specific and molar conductance of NaCl solution. Given that

κ

κ

\= 1.3 Sm (for 0.1M KCl solution) R = 190

A .

\-1

Ω _l_

   = R = (1.3 Sm (190 )

\= 247 m

\-1

\-1

) Ω

κ(NaCl (NaClR

A

\= 1 6.3 K

(247 m -1

) )

)

\=  

 

1 _l_

Ω 6.3K = 6.3 10

\= 39.2 10 Sm

3

\-3 -1

Ω ×

×

Ω

Λ m

\-1

\= 10 mol m

M

\= 39.2 10 (Sm ) 10

\-3 3

\-3 -1

κ ×

× × -3 3

\-3 2 -1

(mol m

0.003

\= 13.04 10 Sm mol

\-1

m

)

Λ ×

## Variation of molar conductivity with concentration
 Friedrich Kohlraush studied the molar conductance of different electrolytes at different

concentrations. He observed that, increase of the molar conductance of an electrolytic solution with the increase in the dilution. One such experimental results is given in the following table for better understanding.

XII U9 Electro Chemistry.indd 39 2/19/2020 5:12:17 PM

www.tntextbooks.in




  

40

**Concentration (M)**

**Molar conductance** ( 10 Sm mol-3 2 -1× )

**NaCl KCl HCl**

0.1 10.674 12.896 39.132

0.01 11.851 14.127 41.20

0.0001 12.374 14.695 42.136

Based on the above such results, Kohlraush deduced the following empirical relationship between the molar conductance ( )Λm and the concentration of the electrolyte (C).

Λ Λm m - k C=  .....(9.11) The above equation represents a straight line of the form y = mx + c . Hence, the plot of

Λm Vs C gives a straight line with a negative slope of –k and the y intercept, Λm  . Where

Λm  is called the limiting molar conductivity. i.e., the molar conductance approaches a limiting

value in very dilute solutions.

For strong electrolytes such as KCl, NaCl etc., the plot, Λm Vs C , gives a straight line as shown in the graph (9.4). It is also observed that the plot is not a linear one for weak electrolytes.

For a strong electrolyte, at high concentration, the number of constituent ions of the electrolyte in a given volume is high and hence the attractive force between the oppositely charged ions is also high. Moreover the ions also experience a viscous drag due to greater solvation. These factors attribute for the low molar conductivity at high concentration. When the dilution increases, the ions are far apart and the attractive forces decrease. At infinite dilution the ions are so far apart, the interaction between them becomes insignificant and hence, the molar conductivity increases and reaches a maximum value at infinite dilution.

For a weak electrolyte, at high concentration, the plot is almost parallel to concentration axis with slight increase in conductivity as the dilution increases. When the concentration

0 0.2 0.4

Strong electrolyte (KCI)

Weak electrolyte (CH3COOH)

c (mol L-1)1/2

 m

(S m

2 m ol

–1 )

0.04

0.02

**Figure 9.4 Variation of molar conductance with concentration**

XII U9 Electro Chemistry.indd 40 2/19/2020 5:12:26 PM

www.tntextbooks.in






| C oncentration(M) |Molar conductance  (1× 0S m  mol )-3 2- 1 |
|------|------|------|------|
| NaCl |KCl |HCl |
| 0.1 |10.674 |12.896 |39.132 |
| 0.01 |11.851 |14.127 |41.20 |
| 0.0001 |12.374 |14.695 |42.136 |


| )1– l mo2 |0.02 |Weak electrolyte (CH CO OH)3 |
|------|------|------|------|
| (S m |m |olyte (KCI) |
| Strong electr |

  

41

approaches zero, there is a sudden increase in the molar conductance and the curve is almost parallel to mΛ axis. This is due to the fact that the dissociation of the weak electrolyte increases with the increase in dilution (Ostwald dilution law). Λm

0 values for strong electrolytes can be obtained by extrapolating the straight line, as shown in figure (9.4). But the same procedure is not applicable for weak electrolytes, as the plot is not a linear one, Λm

0 values of the weak electrolytes can be determined using Kohlraush's law.

### Debye - Huckel and Onsager equation


We have learnt that at infinite dilution, the interaction between the ions in the electrolyte solution is negligible. Except this condition, electrostatic interaction between the ions alters the properties of the solution from those expected from the free – ions value. The influence of ion-ion interactions on the conductivity of strong electrolytes was studied by Debye and Huckel. They considered that each ion is surrounded by an ionic atmosphere of opposite sign, and derived an expression relating the molar conductance of strong electrolytes with the concentration by assuming complete dissociation. Later, the equation was further developed by Onsager. For a uni – univalent electrolyte the Debye Huckel and Onsager equation is given below.

Λ Λ Λm m 0

m 0 = A + B C− ( ) .....(9.12)

Where A and B are the constants which depend only on the nature of the solvent and temperature. The expression for A and B are

A = 82.4 DT

; B = 8.20 10 DT

5

η ×

3

Here, D is the dielectric constant of the medium, η the viscosity of the medium and T the temperature in Kelvin.

### Kohlraush's law


The limiting molar conductance Λm 0 is the basis for kohlraush law. At infinite dilution,

the limiting molar conductivity of an electrolyte is equal to the sum of the limiting molar conductivities of its constituent ions. i.e., the molar conductivity is due to the independent migration of cations in one direction and anions in the opposite direction.

For a uni – univalent electrolyte such as NaCl, the Kohlraush's law is expressed as

Λm 0

NaCl m 0

Na+ m 0

Cl- + ( ) = ( ) ( )λ λ

In general, according to Kohlraush's law, the molar conductivity at infinite dilution for a electrolyte represented by the formula A Bx y , is given below.

Λm 0

AxBy m 0

y+ m 0

x- x + y A B( ) = ( ) ( )λ λ .....(9.13)

Kohlraush arrived the above mentioned relationship based on the experimental observations such as the one as shown in the table. These result show that at infinite dilution each constituent ion of the electrolyte makes a definite contribution towards the molar conductance of the electrolyte irrespective of nature of other ion with which it is associated

XII U9 Electro Chemistry.indd 41 2/19/2020 5:12:31 PM

www.tntextbooks.in




  

42

i.e., Λ Λm KCl m NaCl

m K+ m Cl-

\= 149.86 - 126.45

\-

 

 

( ) − ( ) ( ) + ( ){ }λ λ λ λ

λ λ

m Na+ m Cl-

m K+ m Na+ - = 23.41

Simila

 

 

( ) + ( ){ }= ( ) ( )

23 41.

rly, we can conclude that = 2.06m Br- m Cl- λ λ ( ) − ( )

**Applications of Kohlrausch's Law 1. Calculation of molar conductance at**

**infinite dilution of a weak electrolyte.**

It is impossible to determine the molar conductance at infinite dilution for weak electrolytes experimentally. However, the same can be calculated using Kohlraush’s Law.

For example, the molar conductance of CH COOH,3 can be calculated using the experimentally determined molar conductivities of strong electrolytes HCl, NaCl and CH COONa3 .

Λ CH COONa

o

Na

o

CH COO

o

3 +

3

\-= + λ λ .....(1)

Λ λ λHCl o

H o

Cl o = + + - .....(2)

ΛNaCl o

Na o

Cl o = + + -λ λ .....(3)

Equation (1) + Equation (2) – Equation (3) gives,

Λ λ λ

Λ CH COONa o

HCl o

NaCl o

H o

CH COO o

CH COO

3 +

3 -

3

\+ - = + ( ) ( ) ( ) =

Λ Λ

H 

**2\. Calculation of degree of dissociation of weak electrolytes** The degree of dissociation of weak electrolyte can be calculated from the molar conductivity

at a given concentration and the molar conductivity at infinite dilution using the following expression

α = m

m

Λ Λ 

.....(9.14)

Calculation of dissociation constant using Λm values. According to Ostwald dilution Law,

K = C (1- )a

α α

2

.....(9.15)

Substitute α value in the above expression ( 9.15)

K C

a

m 2

o

m

2 m

m o

\= −

 

 

Λ

Λ Λ Λ

1

**Electrolyte** Λm 0 **at 298 K Difference**

KCl

NaCl

149.86

126.45 23.41 KBr

NaBr

151.92

128.51 23.41

KNO NaNO

3

3

114.96

121.55 23.41

**Electrolyte** Λm 0 **at 298 K Difference**

KBr

KCl

151.92

149.86 2.06 NaBr

NaCl

128.51

126.45 2.06 LiBr

LiCl

117.09

115.03 2.06

XII U9 Electro Chemistry.indd 42 2/19/2020 5:12:42 PM

www.tntextbooks.in






| Ele ctrolyte |at 298 KΛ0m |Dierence |
|------|------|------|
| KClNaCl |149.86126.45 |23.41 |
| KBrNaBr |151.92128.51 |23.41 |
| KNONaNO33 |114.96121.55 |23.41 |


| Ele ctrolyte |at 298 KΛ0m |Dierence |
|------|------|------|
| KBrKCl |151.92149.86 |2.06 |
| NaBrNaCl |128.51126.45 |2.06 |
| LiBrLiCl |117.09115.03 |2.06 |
  

43

K = C

a m

m m m

m

Λ

Λ Λ Λ Λ

2

2 



( )−

⇒ −

K = C a

m

m m m

Λ Λ Λ Λ

2

 ( ) .....(9.16)

**3\. Calculation of solubility of sparingly soluble salts**

Substances like AgCl, PbSO4 etc., are sparingly soluble in water. The solubility product of such substances can be determined using conductivity measurements.

Let us consider AgCl as an example

AgCl (s) Ag + Cl

\+ −

K = \[Ag \]\[Cl \]sp + -

Let the concentration of \[Ag \] + be ‘C’ molL–1.

As per the stoichiometry, if \[Ag \] = C, then \[Cl+ −\]also equal to ‘C’ mol L−1 . K =C.C

K = C sp

sp⇒ 2

We know that the concentration (in mol dm-3) is related to the molar and specific conductance by the following expressions

Λ κ

κ

o

10 C (in mol L

(or)

C =

\- -

\-

\= ×

×

3

1

310

)

Λ 

Substitute the concentration value in the relation K = Csp 2

K = 10 sp

\-κ × 

 

3 2

Λ 

.....(9.17)

## Electrochemical Cell
 Electrochemical cell is a device which converts chemical energy into electrical energy

and vice versa. It consists of two separate electrodes which are in contact with an electrolyte solution. Electrochemical cells are mainly classified into the following two types.

1\. **Galvanic Cell ( Voltaic cell)** : It is a device in which a spontaneous chemical reaction generates an electric current i.e., it converts chemical energy into electrical energy. It is commonly known as a battery.

2\. **Electrolytic cell** : It is a device in which an electric current from an external source drives a nonspontaneous reaction i.e., it converts electrical energy into chemical energy.

XII U9 Electro Chemistry.indd 43 2/19/2020 5:12:52 PM

www.tntextbooks.in




  

44

### Galvanic cell


We have already learnt in XI standard that when a zinc metal strip is placed in a copper sulphate solution, the blue colour of the solution fades and the copper is deposited on the zinc strip as red – brown crust due to the following spontaneous chemical reaction.

Zn(s) + CuSO (aq) ZnSO (aq) + Cu (s)4 4→

The energy produced in the above reaction is lost to the surroundings as heat.

In the above redox reaction, Zinc is oxidised to Zn2+ ions and the Cu2+ ions are reduced to metallic copper. The half reactions are represented as below.

Zn(s) Zn (aq) + 2e (oxidation)2+ -→

Cu (aq) + 2e Cu (s) (reduction)2+ - →

If we perform the above two half reactions separately in an apparatus as shown in figure 9.5, some of the energy produced in the reaction will be converted into electrical energy. Let us understand the function of a galvanic cell by considering Daniel cell as an example. It uses the above reaction for generation of electrical energy.

The separation of half reaction is the basis for the construction of Daniel cell. It consists of two half cells.

**Oxidation half cell**

A metallic zinc strip that dips into an aqueous solution of zinc sulphate taken in a beaker, as shown in Figure 9.5.

**Reduction half cell**

A copper strip that dips into an aqueous solution of copper sulphate taken in a beaker, as shown in Figure 9.5.

**Joining the half cells**

The zinc and copper strips are externally connected using a wire through a switch (k) and a load (example: volt meter). The electrolytic solution present in the cathodic and anodic compartment are connected using an inverted U tube containing a agar-agar gel mixed with an inert electrolytes such as KCl, Na SO2 4 etc., The ions of inert electrolyte do not react with other ions present in the half cells and they are not either oxidised (or) reduced at the electrodes. The solution in the salt bridge cannot get poured out, but through which the ions can move into (or) out of the half cells.

When the switch (k) closes the circuit, the electrons flows from zinc strip to copper strip. This is due to the following redox reactions which are taking place at the respective electrodes.

XII U9 Electro Chemistry.indd 44 2/19/2020 5:13:00 PM

www.tntextbooks.in




  

45

Digital voltmeter

1.10

Salt bridge

Na2SO4(aq)

2(Na+)

Zn(s) Zn2+(aq) + 2e− Cu2+(aq) + 2e− Cu(s)

2e- 2e-

Zn

(Zn2++SO4 2-)

(Cu2++SO4 2-)

SO4 2-

Zinc (anode)

− +

Cu

SO4 2-

Zn2+

e-

Copper (cathode)

CuSO4(aq)

e-

Cu2 Cu2

Cu

2e

Zn2

Zn2

Zn

2e

Cu2+

ZnSO4 (aq)

**Figure 9.5 : Daniel cell**

**Anodic oxidation** The electrode at which the oxidation occurs is called the anode. In Daniel cell, the oxidation

take place at zinc electrode, i.e., zinc is oxidised to Zn2+ ions by loosing its electrons. The Zn2+

ions enter the solution and the electrons enter the zinc metal, then flow through the external wire and then enter the copper strip. Electrons are liberated at zinc electrode and hence it is negative ( - ve).

Zn(s) Zn (aq) + 2e (los2+ -→ s of electron-oxidation)

**Cathodic reduction** As discussed earlier, the electrons flow through the circuit from zinc to copper, where

the Cu 2+ ions in the solution accept the electrons, get reduced to copper and the same get

deposited on the electrode. Here, the electrons are consumed and hence it is positive (+ve).

Cu (aq) + 2e Cu (s) (gain of elect2+ - → ron-reduction)

XII U9 Electro Chemistry.indd 45 2/19/2020 5:13:05 PM

www.tntextbooks.in






| e |e |
|------|------|------|------|------|
| 1.10 |
| −+ |



| 2(Na )SO +-4 Na SO (aq)2 4+ |2e |(cat-Cu + |
|------|------|------|------|------|------|------|
| 2e- |
| Zn |Cu |

  

46

**Salt bridge**

The electrolytes present in two half cells are connected using a salt bridge. We have learnt that the anodic oxidation of zinc electrodes results in the increase in concentration of Zn2+

in solution. i.e., the solution contains more number of Zn2+ ions as compared to SO4 2- and

hence the solution in the anodic compartment would become positively charged. Similarly, the solution in the cathodic compartment would become negatively charged as the Cu2+ ions are reduced to copper i.e., the cathodic solution contain more number of SO4

2- ions compared to Cu2+ .

To maintain the electrical neutrality in both the compartments, the non reactive anions Cl- (from KCl taken in the salt bridge) move from the salt bridge and enter into the anodic compartment, at the same time some of the K+ ions move from the salt bridge into the cathodic compartment.

**Completion of circuit**

Electrons flow from the negatively charged zinc anode into the positively charged copper cathode through the external wire, at the same time, anions move towards anode and cations are move towards the cathode compartment. This completes the circuit.

**Consumption of Electrodes**

As the Daniel cell operates, the mass of zinc electrode gradually decreases while the mass of the copper electrode increases and hence the cell will function until the entire metallic zinc electrode is converted in to Zn2+ or the entire Cu2+ ions are converted in to metallic copper.

Unlike Daniel cell, in certain cases, the reactants (or) products cannot serve as electrodes and in such cases inert electrode such as graphite (or) platinum is used which conducts current in the external circuit.

### Galvanic cell notation


The galvanic cell is represented by a cell diagram, for example, Daniel cell is represented as

Zn (s) Zn (aq) Cu (aq) Cu (s)2+ 2+

In the above notation, a single vertical bar (|) represents a phase boundary and the double vertical bar (||) represents the salt bridge.

The anode half cell is written on the left side of the salt bridge and the cathode half cell on the right side.

The anode and cathode are written on the extreme left and extreme right, respectively.

The emf of the cell is written on the right side after cell diagram.

XII U9 Electro Chemistry.indd 46 2/19/2020 5:13:12 PM

www.tntextbooks.in




  

47

Phase boundary Phase boundary

2+ 2+Zn (s) Zn (aq) Cu (aq) Cu (s) = 1.1V

Anode Cathode Standard emf of the cell (extreme Le) (extreme right)

Anode half cell

Le Salt bridge

Right Cathode Half cell

**Example**

The net redox reaction of a galvanic cell is given below

2 Cr (s) + 3Cu (aq) 2Cr (aq) + 3Cu (s) 2+ 3+ →

Write the half reactions and describe the cell using cell notation.

Anodic oxidation 2Cr (s) 2Cr (aq) + 6e 3+ -→ .....(1)

Cathodic reduction : 3Cu (aq) + 6e Cu (s)2+ - → 3 .....(2)

Cell Notation is

3+ 2+Cr (s) Cr (aq) Cu (aq) Cu(s)

### _emf_ of a Cell


We have learnt that when two half cells of a Daniel cell are connected, a spontaneous redox reaction will take place which results in the flow of electrons from anode to cathode. The force that pushes the electrons away from the anode and pulls them towards cathode is called the electromotive force (emf) (or) the cell potential. The SI unit of cell potential is the volt (v).

When there is one volt difference in electrical potential between the anode and cathode, one joule of energy is released for each columb of charge that moves between them.

i.e., 1J = 1C 1V× .....(9.18)

The cell voltage depends on the nature of the electrodes, the concentration of the electrolytes and the temperature at which the cell is operated. For example

At, 25C , The emf of the below mentioned Daniel cell is 1.107 Volts

Zn (s) Zn (aq,1M) Cu (aq,1M) Cu s 2+ 2+ ( ) E = 1.107 V

0

XII U9 Electro Chemistry.indd 47 2/19/2020 5:13:19 PM

www.tntextbooks.in




  

48

### Measurement of electrode potential
 The overall redox reaction can be considered as the sum

of two half reactions i.e., oxidation and reduction. Similarly, the emf of a cell can be considered as the sum of the electrode potentials at the cathode and anode,

E = E + Ecell ox anode red cathode( ) ( ) .....(9.19) Here, E ox anode( ) represents the oxidation potential at

anode and Ered cathode( ) represents the reduction potential at cathode. It is impossible to measure the emf of a single electrode, but we can measure the potential difference between the two electrodes Ecell( )using a voltmeter. If we know the emf of any one of the electrodes which constitute the cell, we can calculate the emf of the other electrode from the measured emf of the cell using the expression (9.19). Hence, we need a reference electrode whose emf is known

For that purpose, Standard Hydrogen Electrode (**SHE**) is used as the reference electrode. It has been assigned an arbitrary emf of exactly zero volt. It consists of a platinum electrode in contact with 1M HCl solution and 1 atm hydrogen gas. The hydrogen gas is bubbled through the solution at 25C as shown in the figure 9.6. SHE can act as a cathode as well as an anode. The Half cell reactions are given below.

If SHE is used as a cathode, the reduction reaction is 2H (aq,1M)+2e H (g, 1 atm) E = 0 volt + -

2 o→

If SHE is used as an anode, the oxidation reaction is H (g,1 atm) 2H (aq, 1M) + 2e E volt2

\+ - o→ = 0 **Illustration**

Let us calculate the reduction potential of zinc electrode dipped in zinc sulphate solution using SHE.

**Step : 1 The following galvanic cell is constructed using SHE**

Zn (s) Zn (aq, 1M) H (aq, 1M) H (g, 1atm) Pt (s)2+ + 2

**Step : 2 The emf of the above galvanic cell is measured using a volt meter. In this case, the** measured emf of the above galvanic cell is 0.76V.

**Calculation We know that,**

E = E + E cell ox Zn Zn red SHE

o o

2+

o( ) ( ) From equation (9.19)\[ \] E = 0.76 and (E = 0Vcell red SHE

o o

) . Substitute these values in the above equation

H2 out H2 in

H2gas

Pt electrode

**(SHE) Figure 9.6 Standard Hydrogen electrode**

XII U9 Electro Chemistry.indd 48 2/19/2020 5:13:28 PM

www.tntextbooks.in




  

49

Standard hydrogen electrode (cathode)

H2(_g_) (1 atm)

H+ (1 M)

H2

2H+ (_aq_) + 2e- H2(_g_)

Digital voltmeter

0.76

Salt bridge

Na2SO4(aq)

2(Na+)

2e-

Zn ZnSO4(aq)

SO4 2-

Zinc (anode)

− +

SO4 2- Zn2+

e-e-

e–

⇒

⇒ =

0.76V = (E + 0V

(E V

ox zn Zn

ox zn Zn

o

2+

o

2+

)

) .0 76

This oxidation potential corresponds to the below mentioned half cell reaction which takes place at the cathode.

Zn Zn + 2e2+ -→ (Oxidation) The emf for the reverse reaction will give the reduction potential Zn +2e Zn ; E = - 0.76V2+ - o

→ ∴ = (E -0.76V.red Zn Zn

o

2+

 )

**IUPAC definition Electrode potential (E)**

Electromotive force of a cell in which the electrode on the left is a standard hydrogen electrode and the electrode on the right is the electrode in question. **Standard electrode potential,** E



The value of the standard emf of a cell in which molecular hydrogen under standard pressure is oxidised to solvated protons at the left hand electrode.

**Evaluate yourself** 1\. The emf of the following cell at 25C is equal to 0.34v. Calculate the reduction potential

of copper electrode. Pt (s) H (g, 1atm) H (aq, 1M) Cu aq, M) Cu (s)

2

\+ 2+ ( 1

2\. Using the calculated emf value of zinc and copper electrode, calculate the emf of the following cell at 25C .

Zn (s) Zn (aq, 1M) Cu (aq, 1M) Cu (s)2+ 2+

**Figure 9.7 _emf_ measurement (Zn | Zn2+ electrode)**

XII U9 Electro Chemistry.indd 49 2/19/2020 5:13:38 PM

www.tntextbooks.in






| ital voltmeter |
|------|------|------|------|------|------|

| 0.76 |




| -Zn+ |2(Na )SO4 Na SO (aq)2 4 |
|------|------|------|------|------|------|------|------|

| e |

| HH+2 |



  

50

**Evaluate yourself**

Write the overall redox reaction which takes place in the galvanic cell,

Pt(s) Fe (aq),Fe (aq) MnO (aq), H (aq),Mn (aq) Pt(s)2+ 3+ 4 - + 2+

## Thermodynamics of cell reactions
 We have just learnt that in a galvanic cell, the chemical energy is converted into electrical

energy. The electrical energy produced by the cell is equal to the product of the total charge of electrons and the emf of the cell which drives these electrons between the electrodes.

If ‘n’ is the number of moles of electrons exchanged between the oxidising and reducing agent in the overall cell reaction, then the electrical energy produced by the cell is given as below.

Electrical energy = Charge of ’n’ mole of electrons Ecel× l ......(9.20) Charge of 1 mole of electrons = one Faraday (1F)

Charge of ’n’ mole ∴ of electrons = nF Equation (9.20) Electrical energy = nF⇒ E cell ......( . )9 21

Charge of one elctron = 1.602 10 C

Charge

\-19×

∴ one mole of elctron = 10 1.602 10 C

236 023 19

. × × × −

\= 96488 C i.e., 1F 96500 C

This energy is used to do the electric work. Therefore the maximum work that can be obtained from a galvanic cell is

(W = - nFE max cell cell) .....(9.22) Here the (-) sign is introduced to indicate that the work is done by the system on the

surroundings.

We know from the Second Law of thermodynamics that the maximum work done by the system is equal to the change in the Gibbs free energy of the system.

maxi.e., W = G ∆ .....(9.23) From (9.22) and (9.23),

DG = - nFE cell .....(9.24) For a spontaneous cell reaction, the DG should be negative. The above expression (9.24)

indicates that Ecell should be positive to get a negative DG value.

When all the cell components are in their standard state, the equation (9.24) becomes

DG = - nFE o cell o .....(9.25)

We know that the standard free energy change is related to the equilibrium constant as per the following expression.

XII U9 Electro Chemistry.indd 50 2/19/2020 5:13:44 PM

www.tntextbooks.in




  

51

DG = - RT lnK o eq .....(9.26)

Comparing (9.25) and (9.26), nFE = RT lnKcell eq



⇒ E = 2.303 RT nF

log K cell eq  .....(9.27)

### Nernst equation
 Nernst equation is the one which relates the cell potential and the concentration of the

species involved in an electrochemical reaction. Let us consider an electrochemical cell for which the overall redox reaction is,

_x y l_A B C mD+ +

The reaction quotient Q for the above reaction is given below

Q = \[C\] \[D\] \[A\] \[B\]

m

x y

_l_

.....(9.28) We have already learnt that,

D DG = G + RT lnQ  .....(9.29)

The Gibbs free energy can be related to the cell emf as follows ∴\[ \] equation (9.24) and (9.25)

D DG = - nFE ; G = - nFEcell o

cell o

Substitute these values and Q from (9.28) in the equation (9.29)

(9.29) ⇒ = - nFE - nFE + RT ln \[C\] \[D\] \[A\] \[B\]cell cell

o m

y

_l_

_x_ .....(9.30)

Divide the whole equation (9.30) by (-nF)

(9.25) E = E - RT nF

\[C\] \[D\] \[A\] \[B\]cell cell

m

y⇒  ln _l_

_x_

(or) E = E - 2.303RT nF

log \[C\] \[D\] \[A\] \[B\]cell cell

m

y 

_l_

_x_ .....(9.31)

The above equation (9.31) is called the Nernst equation

At 25 o C (298K), the above equation (9.31) becomes,

E = E - 2.303 8.314 298 n(96500)

log \[C\] \[D\] \[A\] \[Bcell cell

o m

x

× × _l_

\]

E = E - 0.0591 n

y

cell cell  log \[C\] \[D\]

\[A\] \[B\]

R = 8.314 JK m

y

\-1 _l_

_x_

∴ mol T = 298 K. 1 F = 96500 C mol

\-1

\-1





  





  

.....(9.32)

Let us calculate the emf of the following cell at 25 Co using Nernst equation.

XII U9 Electro Chemistry.indd 51 2/19/2020 5:13:53 PM

www.tntextbooks.in




  

52

Cu (s) Cu (0.25 aq, M) Fe (0.005 aq M) Fe (0.1 aq M) Pt (s)2+ 3+ 2+

Given : E = 0.77V and E = 0.34 Vo

Fe Fe

o

Cu Cu3+ 2+ 2+( ) ( ) Half reactions are Cu (s) Cu (aq) + 2e 2+ -→ ..... (1) 2 Fe (aq)+2e 2Fe (aq) 3+ - 2+→ ..... (2)

the overall reaction is

Cu (s) + 2 Fe (aq) Cu (aq) + 2 Fe (aq) 3+ 2+ 2+→ , and n = 2

Apply Nernst equation at .25 Co .

E =E log \[Cu \]\[Fe \] \[Fe \]

cell cell o

2+ 2+ 2

3+ 2 − 0 0591

2 . \[Cu (s)\] = 1\[ \]

E = E + (Ecell o

ox Cu Cu red Fe Fe2+ 3+ 2+

 ( ) )

Given standard reduction potential of Cu Cu2+ is 0.34V

∴ (E ) = -0.34Vox o

Cu Cu2+

(E ) = 0.77Vred o

Fe Fe3+ 2+

∴ E = - 0.34 + 0.77 E = 0.43V

cell

cell





∴ × E = 0.43 - 0.0591 2cell log ( . )( . )

( . ) 0 25 0 1

0 005

2

2 = log (0.25)(0.1)

\= log 25 10 1 10

\= l

2

\-2 -2

( . )0 005

25 10

2

6

× × × × −

og 10 = 2 log = 2.

2

1010 = 0.43 - 0.0591

2 = 0.43 - 0.0591 = 0.3709V.

× 2

**Evaluate yourself**

The electrochemical cell reaction of the Daniel cell is

Zn (s) + Cu (aq) Zn (aq)+Cu (s)2+ 2+→ What is the change in the cell voltage on increasing the ion concentration in the anode

compartment by a factor 10?

XII U9 Electro Chemistry.indd 52 2/19/2020 5:14:06 PM

www.tntextbooks.in




  

53

**Electrolytic cell and electrolysis**

Electrolysis is a process in which the electrical energy is used to cause a non-spontaneous chemical reaction to occur; the energy is often used to decompose a compound into its elements. The device which is used to carry out the electrolysis is called the electrolytic cell. The electrochemical process occurring in the electrolytic cell and galvanic cell are the reverse of each other. Let us understand the function of a electrolytic cell by considering the electrolysis of molten sodium chloride.

The electrolytic cell consists of two iron electrodes dipped in molten sodium chloride and they are connected to an external DC power supply via a key as shown in the figure (9.8). The electrode which is attached to the negative end of the power supply is called the cathode, and the one which attached to the positive end is called the anode. Once the key is closed, the external DC power supply drives the electrons to the cathode and at the same time pull the electrons from the anode.

**Cell reactions**

Na+ ions are attracted towards cathode, where they combine with the electrons and reduced to liquid sodium.

Cathode (reduction)

Na ( )+e Na ( + -_l l_→ ) E - Vo = 2 71.

Similarly, Cl– ions are attracted towards anode where they lose their electrons and oxidised to chlorine gas.

Anode (oxidation)

2Cl Cl (g) + 2e - 2

\-( )_l_ → E = -1.36o V

Molten NaCl and CaCl2

Molten Na

Cl2 gas

Molten Na

Cylindrical steel cathode

Graphite anode 2 Cl−(_l_) Cl2( _g_) + 2 e−

+

2 Na+(_l_) + 2 e− 2 Na(_l_)

NaCl

**Figure 9.8 Electrolysis of molten NaCl**

XII U9 Electro Chemistry.indd 53 2/19/2020 5:14:10 PM

www.tntextbooks.in







|------|------|------|------|------|------|------|------|






  

54

The overall reaction is,

2Na Cl 2Na Cl + - 2( ) ( ) ( ) ( )_l l l g_\+ → +2 E = - 4.07Vo

The negative Eo value shows that the above reaction is a non spontaneous one. Hence, we have to supply a voltage greater than 4.07V to cause the electrolysis of molten NaCl.

In electrolytic cell, oxidation occurs at the anode and reduction occur at the cathode as in a galvanic cell, but the sign of the electrodes is the reverse i.e., in the electrolytic cell cathode is –ve and anode is +ve.

**Faraday’s Laws of electrolysis**

**First Law**

The mass of the substance (m) liberated at an electrode during electrolysis is directly proportional to the quantity of charge (Q) passed through the cell.

i.e m Qα

We know that the charge is related to the current by the equation I = Q t

Q = It⇒ ∴ m It (or) m = Z It

α

..... (9.33) Where is Z is known as the electro chemical equivalent of the substance produced of the

electrode.

When, I = 1A and t = 1sec, Q = 1C , in such case the equation (9.32) becomes, (9.33)

⇒ m = Z .....(9.34)

Thus, the electrochemical equivalent is defined as the amount of substance deposited or liberated at the electrode by a charge of 1 coulomb.

**Electro chemical equivalent and molar mass** Consider the following general electrochemical redox reaction M (aq)+ne M(s)n+ - → We can infer from the above equation that ‘n’ moles of electrons are required to precipitate

1 mole of Mn+ as M(s). The quantity of charge required to

precipitate one mole of Mn+ = Charge of 'n' moles of electrons

\= nF In other words, the mass of substance deposited by one coulomb of charge

Electrochemical equivalent of M = Molarmass of M n (96500)

n+

(or)

Z = Equivalent mass 96500

.....(9.35)

XII U9 Electro Chemistry.indd 54 2/19/2020 5:14:17 PM

www.tntextbooks.in




  

55

**Second Law**

NiSO4 (_aq_)

Rh Key

CuSO4 (_aq_) CoSO4 (_aq_)

**\+ – + – +**

**+**

**–**

**– A**

**Figure 9.9 Electrolysis of various electrolytes using same quantity of charge**

When the same quantity of charge is passed through the solutions of different electrolytes, the amount of substances liberated at the respective electrodes are directly proportional to their electrochemical equivalents.

Let us consider three electrolytic cells connected in series to the same DC electrical source as shown in the figure 9.9. Each cell is filled with a different electrolytes namely NiSO4, CuSO4 and CoSO4, respectively.

When Q coulomb charge is passed through the electrolytic cells the masses of Nickel, copper and cobalt deposited at the respective electrodes be m m and m Ni Cu Co, , respectively.

According to Faraday’s second Law,

m Z , m Z and m Z (or)

m Z

\= m Z

Ni Ni Cu Cu Co Co

Ni

Ni

Cu

α α α

Cu

Co

Co

\= m Z

.....(9.36) **Example**

A solution of silver nitrate is electrolysed for 20 minutes with a current of 2 amperes. Calculate the mass of silver deposited at the cathode.

Electrochemical reaction at cathode is Ag +e Ag (reduction)+ - →

m = ZIt Z = molarmass of Ag = 108 1 96500

m = 108 gm ( )96500 ×

ol C mol

C I = 2A

m =

\-1

\-196500 2400×

2.68 g. t = 20 60S = 1200 S

× It = 2A S = 2×1200 400C

XII U9 Electro Chemistry.indd 55 2/19/2020 5:14:20 PM

www.tntextbooks.in




  

56

**Evaluate yourself** A solution of a salt of metal was electrolysed for 15 minutes with a current of 0.15 amperes. The mass of the metal deposited at the cathode is 0.783g. calculate the equivalent mass of the metal.

**Batteries** Batteries are indispensable in the modern electronic world. For example, Li – ion batteries

are used in cell phones, dry cell in flashlight etc…. These batteries are used as a source of direct current at a constant voltage. We can classify them into primary batteries (non – rechargeable) and secondary batteries (rechargeable). In this section, we will briefly discuss the electrochemistry of some batteries. **Leclanche cell** Anode : Zinc container Cathode : Graphite rod in contact with MnO2

Electrolyte : ammonium chloride and zinc chloride in water Emf of the cell is about 1.5V Cell reaction Oxidation at anode

Zn (s) Zn (aq)+2e 2+ -→ .....(1) Reduction at cathode

2 NH (aq) + 2e 2NH (aq) + H (g) 4 -

3 2 + → .....(2)

The hydrogen gas is oxidised to water by MnO2

H (g) + 2 MnO (s) Mn O (s) + H O ( ) 2 2 2 3 2→ _l_ .....(3) Equation (1) + (2)+(3) gives the overall redox reaction

Dry cell battery

Carbon (cathode)

Electrolyte paste

Separator

Carbon and manganse

doxide mixture

Zinc (anode)

Electrons (e-)

Electrons (e-)

Electrons (e-)

Electrons (e-)

**Light bulb (load)**

**Figure 9.10 Leclanche cell**

XII U9 Electro Chemistry.indd 56 2/19/2020 5:14:23 PM

www.tntextbooks.in






| ttery |ElectrLi |
|------|------|------|------|



| Electr |

  

57

Zn (s) + 2NH (aq) + 2 MnO (s) Zn (aq) + Mn O (s) + H4 2 2+

2 3 2 + → O + NH ...... (4)( )_l_ 2 3

Ammonia produced at the cathode combines with Zn2+ to form a complex ion

Zn (NH (aq)3 )4

2\[ \] + . As the reaction proceeds, the concentration of NH4 + will decrease and

the aqueous NH3 will increase which lead to the decrease in the emf of cell. **Mercury button cell**

Anode : zinc amalgamated with mercury Cathode : HgO mixed with graphite Electrolyte : Paste of KOH and ZnO Oxidation occurs at anode : Zn(s) + 2OH (aq) ZnO(s) + H O 2e

0 -

from KOH

+2

2 -→ +( )_l_

Reduction occurs at cathode : HgO(s) + H O (l) + 2e Hg(l) + 2OH (aq) +2

2 -

0 -→

Overall reaction : Zn (s) + HgO (s) ZnO (s) + Hg → ( )_l_ Cell emf : about 1.35V.

Uses : It has higher capacity and longer life. Used in pacemakers, electronic watches, cameras etc…

Outer steel case

Steel outer top

Tin-plated inner top

Sealing and insulation

gasket Zn (anode)

HgO mixed with graphite (cathode)

KOH saturated with ZnO in

absorbent material (electrolyte)

Inner steel case

Barrier Gas vent

**Figure 9.11 Mercury button cell**

**Secondary batteries**

We have already learnt that the electrochemical reactions which take place in a galvanic cell may be reversed by applying a potential slightly greater than the emf generated by the cell. Th is principle is used in secondary batteries to regenerate the original reactants. Let us understand the function of secondary cell by considering the lead storage battery as an example

XII U9 Electro Chemistry.indd 57 2/19/2020 5:14:29 PM

www.tntextbooks.in




  

58

Lead storage battery Anode : spongy lead Cathode : lead plate bearing PbO2

Electrolyte : 38% by mass of H SO2 4 with density 1.2g / mL. Oxidation occurs at the anode

Pb(s) Pb (aq)+2e2+ -→ .....(1) The Pb2+ ions combine with SO4

\-2 to from PbSO4 precipitate. Pb (aq) + SO (aq) PbSO (s)2+

4 4 2− → .....(2)

Reduction occurs at the cathode PbO (s) + 4 H (aq) + 2e Pb (aq) + 2H O 2

\+ - 2+ 2→ ( )_l_ ......(3)

The Pb 2+ ions also combine with SO4

2- ions from sulphuric acid to form PbSO4 precipitate. Pb (aq) + SO (aq) PbSO

2+

4 4

2− → (s) .....(4) The Overall reactions is Equation (1) + (2) + (3) + (4)

Pb (s) + PbO (s) + 4H (aq) + 2SO (aq) 2 PbSO (s) 2

+

4 4

2− → + 2H O 2

( )_l_ The emf of a single cell is about 2V . Usually six such cells are combined in series to

produce 12volt The emf of the cell depends on the concentration of H SO

2 4 . As the cell reaction uses SO4

2−

ions, the concentration H SO2 4 decreases. When the cell potential falls to about 1.8V, the cell has to be recharged. **Recharge of the cell**

As said earlier, a potential greater than 2V is applied across the electrodes, the cell reactions that take place during the discharge process are reversed. During recharge process, the role of anode and cathode is reversed and H SO2 4 is regenerated.

Oxidation occurs at the cathode ( now act as anode) PbSO (s) + 2H O PbO (s) + 4 H (aq) + SO (aq +2

4 2

+4

2 +

4( ) -_l_ → 2 ) + 2e-

Reduction occurs at the anode (now act as cathode) PbSO (s) + 2e Pb(s) + SO (aq)4 4 - -→ 2

Overall reaction 2PbSO (s) + 2H O Pb (s) + PbO (s) + 4H (aq) SO

4 2 2

+

4

2- ( )_l_ → + 2 (aq).

Thus, the overall cell reaction is exactly the reverse of the redox reaction which takes place while discharging . **Uses:** Used in automobiles, trains, inverters etc… **The lithium – ion Battery** Anode : Porus graphite Cathode : transition metal oxide

such as CoO2. **Figure 9.12 lithium – ion Battery**

XII U9 Electro Chemistry.indd 58 2/19/2020 5:14:45 PM

www.tntextbooks.in




  

59

Electrolyte : Lithium salt in an organic solvent

At the anode oxidation occurs

Li (s) Li (aq) + e+ -→

At the cathode reduction occurs Li + CoO (s) + e Li CoO (s) +

2 -

2→

Overall reactions Li (s) + CoO LiCoO (s)2 2→

Both electrodes allow Li+ ions to move in and out of their structures.

During discharge, the Li+ ions produced at the anode move towards cathode through the non – aqueous electrolyte. When a potential greater than the emf produced by the cell is applied across the electrode, the cell reaction is reversed and now the Li+ ions move from cathode to anode where they become embedded on the porous graphite electrode. This is known as intercalation.

**Uses :**

Used in cellular phones, laptops, computers, digital cameras, etc…

**Fuel cell**

The galvanic cell in which the energy of combustion of fuels is directly converted into electrical energy is called the fuel cell. It requires a continuous supply of reactant to keep functioning. The general representation of a fuel cell is follows

Fuel | Electrode | Electrolyte | Electrode | Oxidant

Let us understand the function of fuel cell by

Negative electrodePositive electrode

Co O

Li

Charge

Li

Li

Discharge

Specialty carbonLiCoO2

**Figure 9.13 Li-ion battery**

**Figure 9.14 H2O2 fuel cell**

Flow field Catalyst layer Membrane

Porous gas diffusion layer

Anode

e e

H2 2H 2e 1/2O2 2H 2e H2O

H2 O2

Cathode

H2O

H

XII U9 Electro Chemistry.indd 59 2/19/2020 5:14:51 PM

www.tntextbooks.in







|------|




|------|




|------|------|------|------|------|------|------|
| Anode |

| e |





| H |
|------|------|------|------|------|------|------|------|------|


| e |Cathode |










  

60

considering hydrogen – oxygen fuel cell. In this case, hydrogen act as a fuel and oxygen as an oxidant and the electrolyte is aqueous KOH maintained at 200 Co and 20 – 40 atm. Porous graphite electrode containing Ni and NiO serves as the inert electrodes.

Hydrogen and oxygen gases are bubbled through the anode and cathode, respectively.

Oxidation occurs at the anode: 2H + 4 OH (aq) 4 H O 2 2 4( ) ( ) e_g l_− −→ +

Reduction occurs at the cathode O (g) + 2 H O (l) + 4e 4 OH (aq)2 2 − −→

The overall reaction is 2H (g) + O (g) 2H O (l) 2 2 2→

The above reaction is the same as the hydrogen combustion reaction, however, they do not react directly ie., the oxidation and reduction reactions take place separately at the anode and cathode respectively like H - O2 2 fuel cell. Other fuel cells like propane –O2 and methane O2 have also been developed.

**Corrosion**

We are familiar with the rusting of iron. Have you ever noticed a green film formed on copper and brass vessels?. In both, the metal is oxidised by oxygen in presence of moisture. This redox process which causes the deterioration of metal is called corrosion. As the corrosion of iron causes damages to our buildings, bridges etc....it is important to know the chemistry of rusting and how to prevent it. Rusting of iron is an electrochemical process.

**Electrochemical mechanism of corrosion**

The formation of rust requires both oxygen and water. Since it is an electrochemical redox process, it requires an anode and cathode in different places on the surface of iron. The iron surface and a droplet of water on the surface as shown in figure (9.15) form a tiny galvanic cell. The region enclosed by water is exposed to low amount of oxygen and it acts as the anode. The remaining area has high amount of oxygen and it acts as cathode. So based on the oxygen content, an electro chemical cell is formed. corrosion occurs at the anode i,e,. in the region enclosed by the water as discussed below.

Fe(s) → Fe2+(aq)+2e– O2(g) + 4H+(aq)+4e– → 2H2O(I)

water

**anodic site**

**cathodic site**

Fe2+

O2

O2

Fe2O3• _x_ H2O

e–

H2O Rust

iron

**Figure 9.15 Rusting of iron**

XII U9 Electro Chemistry.indd 60 2/19/2020 5:14:57 PM

www.tntextbooks.in




  

61

**At anode (oxidation): Iron dissolves in the anode region**

2Fe(s) 2Fe 2+

(aq)+4e - E V.→ = 0 44.

The electrons move through the iron metal from the anode to the cathode area where the oxygen dissolved in water, is reduced to water.

**At Cathode (reduction)** The reaction of atmospheric carbon dioxide with water gives carbonic acid which furnishes

the H + ions for reduction.

O2(g)+4H +

(aq)+4e -

2H2O ( ) → _l_ E V  = 1 23.

The electrical circuit is completed by the migration of ions through water droplet.

The overall redox reactions is, + 2+2Fe(s)+O (g)+4H (aq) 2Fe (aq) + 2H O( ) E 0.444 1.23 1.67V2 2 _l_→ = + =

The positive emf value indicates that the reaction is spontaneous.

Fe 2+ ions are further oxidised to Fe

3+ , which on further reaction with oxygen to form rust. 4Fe

2+ (aq)+O2(g)+4H

\+ (aq) 4Fe

3+ (aq)+2H2O(l)→

3+ +2Fe (aq)+4H O(l) Fe O .H O(s) + 6H (aq)2 2 3 2→

Other metals such as aluminium, copper and silver also undergo corrosion, but at a slower rate than iron. For example, let us consider the reduction of aluminium,

Al(s) Al (aq)+3e→ + −3

Al 3+ , which reacts with oxygen in air to forms a protective coating of Al2O3 . This coating act as

a protective film for the inner surface. So,further corrosion is prevented.

**Protection of metals form corrosion** This can be achieved by the following methods. i. Coating metal surface by paint. ii. Galvanizing - by coating with another metal such as zinc. zinc is stronger reducing agent

than iron and hence it can be more easily corroded than iron. i.e., instead of iron, the zinc is oxidised.

iii. Cathodic protection - In this technique, unlike galvanising the entire surface of the metal to be protected need not be covered with a protecting metal. Instead, metals such as Mg or zinc which is corroded more easily than iron can be used as a sacrificial anode and the iron material acts as a cathode. So iron is protected, but Mg or Zn is corroded.

**Passivation - The metal is treated with strong oxidising agents such as concentrated HNO3** . As a result, a protective oxide layer is formed on the surface of metal. **Alloy formation - The oxidising tendency of iron can be reduced by forming its alloy with other more** anodic metals.

Example, stainless steel - an alloy of Fe and Cr .

XII U9 Electro Chemistry.indd 61 2/19/2020 5:15:11 PM

www.tntextbooks.in




  

62

**Electrochemical series**

We have already learnt that the standard single electrode potentials are measured using standard hydrogen electrode. The standard electrode potential at 298K for various metal - metal ion electrodes are arranged in the decreasing order of their standard reduction potential values as shown in the figure.

This series is called electrochemical series.

The standard reduction potential (E )  is a measure of the oxidising

tendency of the species. The greater the E value, greater is the tendency shown by the species to accept electrons and undergo reduction. So higher the (E**∞**) Value, lesser is the tendency to undergo corrosion

**EVALUATION**

**Choose the correct answer:**

1\. The number of electrons that have a total charge of 9650 coulombs is

a) 6 22 1023. × b) 6 022 1024. ×

c) 6 022 1022. × c) 6 022 10 34. × −

2\. Consider the following half cell reactions:

Mn + 2e Mn E -1.18V2+ − → =

2 3+ -Mn Mn e E = -1.51V+ → + 

The E for the reaction 2+ 3+3Mn Mn+2Mn ,→ and the possibility of the forward reaction are respectively. a) 2.69V and spontaneous b) -2.69 and non spontaneous c) 0.33V and Spontaneous d) 4.18V and non spontaneous

3\. The button cell used in watches function as follows

Zn (s) + Ag O (s) + H O ( ) 2 Ag (s) + Zn (aq) + 2OH (2 2 _l_ 

2+ − aq) the half cell potentials are 2 2Ag O (s) + H O ( ) + 2e 2Ag (s) + 2 OH (aq) E 0.34V_l_ − −→ = The cell potential will be

Half Reaction Standard Potential (V)

\-3.05

\-2.36

\-1.66 -0.76 -0.44 -0.13

+0.34 +0.77 +0.80 +1.23 +1.36 +1.67

+2.87

0.00

St ro

ng er

o xi

di zi

ng a

ge nt

Stronger reducing agent

**Li**

**F2 Pb4+**

Cl2

O2+4H+

Ag+

Fe3+

Cu2+

2H+

Pb2+

Fe2+

Zn2+

Al3+

Mg2+

Li+

**Mg Al Zn** Fe Pb

Cu Fe2+

Ag 2H2O 2Cl-

Pb2+

2F-

H2

+

\+ + + + + + + + + + +

+

\+ 1e-

1e-

1e-

2e-

2e-

2e-

2e-

2e-

2e-

2e-

2e-

2e-

3e-

4e-

XII U9 Electro Chemistry.indd 62 2/19/2020 5:15:19 PM

www.tntextbooks.in




  

63

a) 0.84V b) 1.34V c) 1.10V d) 0.42V

4\. The molar conductivity of a 0.5 mol dm-3 solution of AgNO3 with electrolytic conductivity of 5 76 10 3 1. × − − S cm at 298 K is

a) 2.88 S cm mol2 -1 b) 2 -111.52 S cm mol

c) 0.086 S cm mol2 -1 d) 28.8 S cm mol 2 -1

5.

Electrolyte KCl KNO3 HCl NaOAC NaCl

(S cm mol

–Λ 2 1− )

149.9 145.0 426.2 91.0 126.5

Calculate HOACΛ  using appropriate molar conductances of the electrolytes listed above at infinite dilution in water at 25 Co .

a) 517.2 b) 552.7 c) 390.7 d) 217.5

6\. Faradays constant is defined as a) charge carried by 1 electron b) charge carried by one mole of electrons c) charge required to deposit one mole of substance d) charge carried by 6 22 1010. × electrons.

7\. How many faradays of electricity are required for the following reaction to occur

MnO Mn4 - 2+→

a) 5F b) 3F c) 1F d) 7F

8\. A current strength of 3.86 A was passed through molten Calcium oxide for 41minutes and 40 seconds. The mass of Calcium in grams deposited at the cathode is (atomic mass of Ca is 40g / mol and 1F = 96500C).

a) 4 b) 2 c) 8 d) 6

9\. During electrolysis of molten sodium chloride, the time required to produce 0.1mole of chlorine gas using a current of 3A is

a) 55 minutes b) 107.2 minutes c) 220 minutes d) 330 minutes

10\. The number of electrons delivered at the cathode during electrolysis by a current of 1A in 60 seconds is (charge of electron = 1 6 10 19. × − C )

a) 236.22 10× b) 6 022 1020. × c) 3 75 1020. × d) 7 48 1023. ×

11\. Which of the following electrolytic solution has the least specific conductance

a) 2N b) 0.002N c) 0.02N d) 0.2N

12\. While charging lead storage battery

a) PbSO4 on cathode is reduced to Pb b) PbSO4 on anode is oxidised to PbO2

XII U9 Electro Chemistry.indd 63 2/19/2020 5:15:33 PM

www.tntextbooks.in






| Electrolyte |KCl |KNO3 |HCl |NaOAC |NaCl |
|------|------|------|------|------|------|
| Λ(S cm  mol )–21 − |149.9 |145.0 |426.2 |91.0 |126.5 |
  

64

c) 4PbSO on anode is reduced to Pb d) PbSO4 on cathode is oxidised to Pb

13\. Among the following cells I) Leclanche cell II) Nickel – Cadmium cell III) Lead storage battery IV) Mercury cell Primary cells are

a) I and IV b) I and III c) III and IV d) II and III

14\. Zinc can be coated on iron to produce galvanized iron but the reverse is not possible. It is because

a) Zinc is lighter than iron

b) Zinc has lower melting point than iron

c) Zinc has lower negative electrode potential than iron

d) Zinc has higher negative electrode potential than iron

15\. Assertion : pure iron when heated in dry air is converted with a layer of rust. Reason : Rust has the composition Fe O3 4

a) if both assertion and reason are true and reason is the correct explanation of assertion.

b) if both assertion and reason are true but reason is not the correct explanation of assertion.

c) assertion is true but reason is false

d) both assertion and reason are false.

16\. In H -O2 2 fuel cell the reaction occurs at cathode is

a) O (g) + 2H O + 4e 4OH (aq)2 2 ( )_l_ − −→

b) H (aq) + OH (aq) H O (+ − → 2 _l_)

c) 2H (g) + O (g) 2H O (g)2 2 2→

d) H + e H + −→ 1

2 2

17\. The equivalent conductance of M 36solution of a weak monobasic acid is 6 mho cm2

equivalent –1 and at infinite dilution is 400 mho cm2 equivalent –1. The dissociation constant of this acid is

a) 1 25 10 6. × − b) 66.25 10−× c) 1 25 10 4. × − d) 56.25 10−×

18\. A conductivity cell has been calibrated with a 0.01M, 1:1 electrolytic solution (specific conductance (κ = S cm1 25 10

3 1 . × − − ) in the cell and the measured resistance was 800 W at

25C . The cell constant is,

a) 10 1 1− − c m b) 101 1 c m− c) 1 1 c m− d) 125.7 10−×

XII U9 Electro Chemistry.indd 64 2/19/2020 5:15:42 PM

www.tntextbooks.in




  

65

19\. Conductivity of a saturated solution of a sparingly soluble salt AB (1:1 electrolyte) at 298K is 1 85 10 5 1. × − − S m . Solubility product of the salt AB at 298K Λm AB

S m mol( ) = × − −14 10 3 2 1 .

a) 125.7 10−× b) 1 32 10 12. × − c) 7 5 10 12. × − d) 121.74 10−×

20\. In the electrochemical cell: Zn ZnSO (0.01M) CuSO (1.0M) Cu4 4 , the emf of this Daniel cell is E1. When the concentration of is changed to 1.0M and that CuSO4 changed to 0.01M, the emf changes to E2. From the above, which one is the relationship between E1 and E2?

a) E1 < E2 b) E1 > E2 c) E E2 1 d) E1 = E2

21\. Consider the change in oxidation state of Bromine corresponding to different emf values as shown in the diagram below:

BrO BrO HBrO Br Br4 - 1.82V

3 - 1.5V 1.595V

2 1.0652V - →  →  →  →

Then the species undergoing disproportionation is

a) Br2 b) BrO4 − c) BrO3

\- d) HBrO

22\. For the cell reaction

2Fe (aq) + 2l (aq) 2Fe (aq) + l (aq)3+ − +→ 2 2

E 0.24V cell o = at 298K. The standard Gibbs energy (∆, G∞) of the cell reactions is :

a) -46.32 KJ mol−1 b) -23.16 KJ mol−1 c) 46.32 KJ mol−1 d) 123.16 KJ mol−

23\. A certain current liberated 0.504gm of hydrogen in 2 hours. How many grams of copper can be liberated by the same current flowing for the same time through copper sulphate solution

a) 31.75 b) 15.8 c) 7.5 d) 63.5

24\. A gas X at 1 atm is bubbled through a solution containing a mixture of 1MY- and 1MZ- at 25 Co . If the reduction potential of Z>Y>X, then

a) Y will oxidize X and not Z b) Y will oxidize Z and not X

d) Y will oxidize both X and Z d) Y will reduce both X and Z

25\. Cell equation : A + 2B A +2B;- 2+→

A + 2e A E V and log K = 15.6 at 300K2 100 34+ −→ = + . for cell reactions find E for

B B+ + →−_e_ (AIIMS – 2018)

a) 0.80 b) 1.26 c) -0.54 d) -10.94

**Short Answer Questions**

1\. Define anode and cathode

2\. Why does conductivity of a solution decrease on dilution of the solution

3\. State Kohlrausch Law. How is it useful to determine the molar conductivity of weak electrolyte at infinite dilution.

XII U9 Electro Chemistry.indd 65 2/19/2020 5:16:07 PM

www.tntextbooks.in




  

66

4\. Describe the electrolysis of molten NaCl using inert electrodes

5\. State Faraday’s Laws of electrolysis

6\. Describe the construction of Daniel cell. Write the cell reaction.

7\. Why is anode in galvanic cell considered to be negative and cathode positive electrode?

8\. The conductivity of a 0.01M solution of a 1 :1 weak electrolyte at 298K is 1.5 10 S cm-4× −1.

i) molar conductivity of the solution

ii) degree of dissociation and the dissociation constant of the weak electrolyte

Given that λ λ

cation

anion

\= 248.2 S cm mol S cm mol





2 1

2 151 8

−

−= .

9\. Which of 0.1M HCl and 0.1 M KCl do you expect to have greater Λ 0

m and why?

10\. Arrange the following solutions in the decreasing order of specific conductance.

i) 0.01M KCl ii) 0.005M KCl iii) 0.1M KCl

iv) 0.25 M KCl v) 0.5 M KCl

11\. Why is AC current used instead of DC in measuring the electrolytic conductance?

12\. 0.1M NaCl solution is placed in two different cells having cell constant 0.5 and 0.25cm-1 respectively. Which of the two will have greater value of specific conductance.

13\. A current of 1.608A is passed through 250 mL of 0.5M solution of copper sulphate for 50 minutes. Calculate the strength of Cu2+ after electrolysis assuming volume to be constant and the current efficiency is 100%.

14\. Can Fe3+ oxidises bromide to bromine under standard conditions?

Given: E Fe Fe3+ 2+

 = 0 771.

E V. Br Br2

− = 1 09.

15\. Is it possible to store copper sulphate in an iron vessel for a long time?

Given : E Cu Cu2+

 = 0 34. V and E V Fe Fe2+

 = −0 44. .

16\. Two metals M1 and M2 have reduction potential values of - V and +yV_x_ respectively.

Which will liberate H2 and H2SO4. 17. Reduction potential of two metals M1 and M2 are E V and E V

M M M M11 2

1 2

2 2 3 0 2+ += − = . .

Predict which one is better for coating the surface of iron. Given : E V Fe Fe2+

 = −0 44.

18\. Calculate the standard emf of the cell: Cd Cd Cu Cu 2+2+ and determine the cell reaction.

The standard reduction potentials of Cu Cu and Cd Cd2+ 2+ are 0.34V and -0.40 volts respectively. Predict the feasibility of the cell reaction.

XII U9 Electro Chemistry.indd 66 2/19/2020 5:16:15 PM

www.tntextbooks.in




  

67

19\. In fuel cell H2 and O2 react to produce electricity. In the process, H2 gas is oxidised at the anode and 2O at cathode. If 44.8 litre of H2 at 25 Co and 1atm pressure reacts in 10 minutes, what is average current produced? If the entire current is used for electro deposition of Cu from Cu2+ , how many grams of deposited?

20\. The same amount of electricity was passed through two separate electrolytic cells containing solutions of nickel nitrate and chromium nitrate respectively. If 2.935g of Ni was deposited in the first cell. The amount of Cr deposited in the another cell? Give : molar mass of Nickel and chromium are 58.74 and 52gm-1 respectively.

21\. A copper electrode is dipped in 0.1M copper sulphate solution at 25 Co . Calculate the electrode potential of copper. \[Given: E

Cu Cu2+  = 0 34. V \].

22\. For the cell Mg (s) Mg (aq) Ag (aq) Ag (s), 2+ + calculate the equilibrium constant at 25 Co and maximum work that can be obtained during operation of cell. Given : E V and E V

Mg Mg Ag Ag2+ +

 = − =2 37 0 80. . .

23\. 8 2 1012. × litres of water is available in a lake. A power reactor using the electrolysis of water in the lake produces electricity at the rate of 2 106 1× − Cs at an appropriate voltage. How many years would it like to completely electrolyse the water in the lake. Assume that there is no loss of water except due to electrolysis.

24\. Derive an expression for Nernst equation

25\. Write a note on sacrificial protection.

26\. Explain the function of H - O2 2 fuel cell.

27\. Ionic conductance at infinite dilution of Al3+ and SO4 2- are 189 and 160 mho cm2 equiv-1.

Calculate the equivalent and molar conductance of the electrolyte Al (SO )2 4 3 at infinite dilution.

XII U9 Electro Chemistry.indd 67 2/19/2020 5:16:23 PM

www.tntextbooks.in




  

68

**Simulating an Voltaic Cell**

**Step – 1**

Open the Browser and type the URL given (or) Scan the QR Code. You will see the webpage as shown in

the figure.

**Step – 2**

Choose the metal electrode and appropriate electrolytic solution for both cathode and anode following the

on screen instructions. Now switch on the volt meter by clicking the red power switch. Now you can see

the flow of electrons and the emf value on the screen.

**Step – 3**

The above steps can be repeated by varying the concentrations of electrolytic solutions of cathode and

anode by selecting appropriate concentration from the list.

By using this tool you can construct an electrochemical

cell with using Ag/Cu/Zn electrodes and measure the emf of the cell. You can also learn how the concentra� on aff ects the emf value of the

cell.

Please go to the URL h� ps:// pages.uoregon.edu/tgreenbo/ voltaicCellEMF.html (or) Scan the QR codeon the right side

**ICT Corner**

XII U9 Electro Chemistry.indd 68 2/19/2020 5:16:25 PM

www.tntextbooks.in




