---
title: 'Uses of carboxylic acids and its derivatives Formic acid'
weight: 15

---

## Uses of carboxylic acids and its derivatives Formic acid


It is used i) for the dehydration of hides. ii) as a coagulating agent for rubber latex iii) in medicine for treatment of gout iv) as an antiseptic in the preservation of fruit juice. **Acetic acid**

It is used i) as table vinegar ii) for coagulating rubber latex iii) for manufacture of cellulose acetate and poly vinylacetate **Benzoic acid**

It is used i) as food preservative either in the pure form or in the form of sodium benzoate ii) in medicine as an urinary antiseptic iii) for manufacture of dyes **Acetyl Chloride**

It is used i) as acetylating agent in organic synthesis ii) in detection and estimation of – OH, - NH2 groups in organic compounds **Acetic anhydride**

It is used i) acetylating agent ii) in the preparation of medicine like asprin and phenacetin iii) for the manufacture plastics like cellulose acetate and poly vinyl acetate. **Ethyl acetate is used** i) in the preparation of artificial fruit essences. ii) as a solvent for lacquers. iii) in the preparation of organic synthetic reagent like ethyl acetoacetate.

XII U12-Carbonyl Compounds.indd 188 2/19/2020 5:16:19 PM

www.tntextbooks.in




  

189

**EVALUATION**

**Choose the correct answer:**

1\. The correct structure of the product ‘A’ formed in the reaction (NEET) O

H2 (gas, 1 atm)

Pd / C, ethanol A is

OH

a) b)

O

c)

OH

d)

OH

2\. The formation of cyanohydrin from acetone is an example of

a) nucleophilic substitution b) electrophilic substitution

c) electrophilic addition d) Nucleophilic addition

3\. Reaction of acetone with one of the following reagents involves nucleophilic addition followed by elimination of water. The reagent is

a) Grignard reagent b) Sn / HCl

c) hydrazine in presence of slightly acidic solution d) hydrocyanic acid

4\. In the following reaction,

HC CH H2SO4

HgSO4

X Product ‘X’ will not give

a) Tollen’s test b) Victor meyer test

c) Iodoform test d) Fehling solution test

5\. CH2 CH2

i) O3

ii) Zn / H2O X

NH3 Y ‘Y’ is

a) Formaldelyde b) di acetone ammonia

c) hexamethylene tetraamine d) oxime

6\. Predict the product Z in the following series of reactions

Ethanoic acid X YPCl C H AnhydrousAlCl

i)CH MgBr ii)

5 6 6

3

3 →  → H O3 + Z → .

a) 3 2 6 5(CH ) C(OH)C H b) CH CH(OH)C H3 6 5

c) CH CH(OH)CH - CH3 2 3 d) CH2 - OH

7\. Assertion: 2,2 – dimethyl propanoic acid does not give HVZ reaction.

Reason: 2 – 2, dimethyl propanoic acid does not have α - hydrogen atom

XII U12-Carbonyl Compounds.indd 189 2/19/2020 5:16:22 PM

www.tntextbooks.in







|------|------|------|





|------|------|------|




|------|------|




|------|------|




|------|------|------|




  

190

a) if both assertion and reason are true and reason is the correct explanation of assertion.

b) if both assertion and reason are true but reason is not the correct explanation of assertion.

c) assertion is true but reason is false

d) both assertion and reason are false.

8\. Which of the following represents the correct order of acidity in the given compounds

a)FCH COOH > CH COOH > BrCH COOH > ClCH COOH2 3 2 2

b)FCH COOH > ClCH COOH > BrCH COOH > CH COOH2 2 2 3

c) CH COOH > ClCH COOH > FCH COOH > Br-CH COOH3 2 2 2

d) Cl CH COOH > CH COOH > BrCH COOH > ICH COOH2 2 23

9\. Benzoic acid 3 2i) NH NaNO /HClNaOBr ii) A B C→ → →D ‘C’ is

a) anilinium chloride b) O – nitro aniline c) benzene diazonium chloride d) m – nitro benzoic acid

10\. Ethanoic acid P/Br2 → 2 – bromoethanoic acid. This reaction is called

a) Finkelstein reaction b) Haloform reaction

c) Hell – Volhard – Zelinsky reaction d) none of these

11\. CH Br (A) (B) (C)3 KCN H O PCl3

\+ 5 →  →  → product (C) is

a) acetylchloride b) chloro acetic acid

c) α- chlorocyano ethanoic acid d) none of these

12\. Which one of the following reduces tollens reagent a) formic acid b) acetic acid

c) benzophenone d) none of these

13\. Br i) Mg, ether

ii) CO2

A H3O+

B ‘B’ is

a) COOH b)

COOH

c) d)

C

O

a) COOH b)

COOH

c) d)

C

O

14\. The IUPAC name of

OH

O

XII U12-Carbonyl Compounds.indd 190 2/19/2020 5:16:26 PM

www.tntextbooks.in







|------|------|------|






|------|------|------|
| Br |
| ) |





|------|





|------|------|------|




| O |
|------|------|------|------|------|




  

191

a) but – 3- enoicacid b) but – 1- ene-4-oicacid

c) but – 2- ene-1-oic acid d) but -3-ene-1-oicacid

15\. Identify the product formed in the reaction C

O

CH3 N2H4

C2H5 ONa

a) b) NH2

C)

C O - C2H5

O d)

16\. In which case chiral carbon is not generated by reaction with HCN

a) b)

C) d)

O OH

O

O

Ph

O

Ph

OH

17\. Assertion : p – N, N – dimethyl aminobenzaldehyde undergoes benzoin condensation Reason : The aldehydic (-CHO) group is meta directing a) if both assertion and reason are true and reason is the correct explanation of assertion. b) if both assertion and reason are true but reason is not the correct explanation of assertion. c) assertion is true but reason is false d) both assertion and reason are false.

18\. Which one of the following reaction is an example of disproportionation reaction a) Aldol condensation b) cannizaro reaction c) Benzoin condensation d) none of these

19\. Which one of the following undergoes reaction with 50% sodium hydroxide solution to give the corresponding alcohol and acid

a) Phenylmethanal b) ethanal c) ethanol d) methanol

XII U12-Carbonyl Compounds.indd 191 2/19/2020 5:16:27 PM

www.tntextbooks.in







|------|

  

192

20\. The reagent used to distinguish between acetaldehyde and benzaldehyde is

a) Tollens reagent b) Fehling’s solution

c) 2,4 – dinitrophenyl hydrazine d) semicarbazide

21\. Phenyl methanal is reacted with concentrated NaOH to give two products X and Y. X reacts with metallic sodium to liberate hydrogen X and Y are

a) sodiumbenzoate and phenol b) Sodium benzoate and phenyl methanol

c) phenyl methanol and sodium benzoate d) none of these

22\. In which of the following reactions new carbon – carbon bond is not formed?

a) Aldol condensation b) Friedel craft reaction

c) Kolbe’s reaction d) Wolf kishner reduction

23\. An alkene “A” on reaction with O3 and Zn - H O2 gives propanone and ethanol in equimolar ratio. Addition of HCl to alkene “A” gives “B” as the major product. The structure of product “B” is

a) Cl CH2 CH2 CH

CH3

CH3

b) H3C CH2 CH CH3

CH2Cl

c) H3C CH2 C CH3

CH3

Cl

d) H3C CH CH

CH3

Cl

24\. Carboxylic acids have higher boiling points than aldehydes, ketones and even alcohols of comparable molecular mass. It is due to their (NEET)

a) more extensive association of carboxylic acid via van der Waals force of attraction

b) formation of carboxylate ion

c) formation of intramolecular H-bonding

d) formation of intermolecular H – bonding

**Short Answer Questions**

1\. How is propanoic acid is prepared starting from (a) an alcohol (b) an alkylhalide (c) an alkene

2\. A Compound (A) with molecular formula C H N2 3 on acid hydrolysis gives(B) which reacts with thionylchloride to give compound(C). Benzene reacts with compound (C) in presence of anhydrous AlCl3 to give compound(D). Compound (D) on reduction with Zn/Hg and Conc.HCl gives (E). Identify (A), (B), (C), (D) and (E). Write the equations.

3\. Identify X and Y.

CH COCH CH COOC H X Y3 2 2 2 5 CH MgBr H O3 3

+

 →  →

XII U12-Carbonyl Compounds.indd 192 2/19/2020 5:16:31 PM

www.tntextbooks.in




  

193

4\. Identify A, B and C

benzoic acid PCl5

A Benzene

Anhydrous AlCl3

B

H+C2H5OH

C C6H5MgBr

5\. Identify A, B, C and D

ethanoic acid A Pd/BaSO4

B C NaOH

D SOCl2

6\. An alkene (A) on ozonolysis gives propanone and aldehyde (B). When (B) is oxidised (C) is obtained. (C) is treated with Br2/P gives (D) which on hydrolysis gives (E). When propanone is treated with HCN followed by hydrolysis gives (E). Identify A, B, C, D and E.

7\. How will you convert benzaldehyde into the following compounds?

(i) benzophenone (ii) benzoic acid

(iii)α-hydroxyphenylaceticacid.

8\. What is the action of HCN on (i) propanone (ii) 2,4-dichlorobenzaldehyde. iii) ethanal

9\. A carbonyl compound A having molecular formula C5H10O forms crystalline precipitate with sodium bisulphate and gives positive iodoform test. A does not reduce Fehling solution. Identify A.

10\. Write the structure of the major product of the aldol condensation of benzaldehyde with acetone.

11\. How are the following conversions effected (a) propanal into butanone (b) Hex-3-yne into hexan-3-one.

(c) phenylmethanal into benzoic acid (d) phenylmethanal into benzoin

12\. Complete the following reaction.

2 2 2HO-CH -CH -CH -OHCH -CH -CH -C-CH ?3 2 2 3 

O dry HCl

13\. Identify A, B and C

Benzyl bromide A C NaCN THF

H3O+

(B) i) CO2

ii) H3O+

Mg ether

XII U12-Carbonyl Compounds.indd 193 2/19/2020 5:16:33 PM

www.tntextbooks.in




  

194

14\. Oxidation of ketones involves carbon – carbon bond cleavage. Name the product (s) is / are formed on oxidising 2,5 – dimethyhexan – 3- one using strong oxidising agent.

15\. How will you prepare

i. Acetic anhydride from acetic acid

ii. Ethylacetate from methylacetate

iii. Acetamide from methylcyanide

iv. Lactic acid from ethanal

v. Acetophenone from acetylchloride

vi. Ethane from sodium acetate

vii. Benzoic acid from toluene

viii. Malachitegreen from benzaldehyde

ix. Cinnamic acid from benzaldehyde

x. Acetaldehyde from ethyne

XII U12-Carbonyl Compounds.indd 194 2/19/2020 5:16:33 PM

www.tntextbooks.in




  

195

Alkenes Ozonolysis

Alkynes dil.H2SO4

HgSO4

Gemdihalides Hydrolysis

Alcohols Cu

R - OH PCC

H / K2Cr2O7

(RCOO)2Ca Dry distillation

Alkyl cyanide (i) Grignard reagent

(ii) H3O+

RCOCl H2/Pd/BaSO4

(Rosenmund's reduction)

R - C N (i) SnCl2/HCl

(ii) Hydrolysis

(Stephen's reaction)

**Methods of preparation**

**Chemical properties**

HCN R OH

C R CN

(Cyanohydrin)

NaHSO3 R OH

C R SO3Na

R C

R N - Z

H2N-Z

(Ammonia derivatives)

Ester(Given by all aldehydes)Tischenko

reaction

\- H containing carbonyl compounds give Aldol reaction

OH

OH Aldehydes without - H give cannizaro reaction

(Clemmensen's reduction)

Zn-Hg

Conc.HCl Alkane

LiAlH2 (H) Alcohol

Oxidation Acids

i) RMgX Alcohols

NH - NH2

OH / Alkane

(Wolf Kishner reduction)

Al(OEt)3

573K

R - OH

(O)

ii) H3O+

**CARBONYL COMPOUNDS**

XII U12-Carbonyl Compounds.indd 195 2/19/2020 5:16:34 PM

www.tntextbooks.in




